today I'm interviewing GN Brandin GN is
an anonymous internet researcher and
writer he's deeply influenced the people
who are building AGI he was one of the
first people to see llm scaling coming
if you read his blog you know he's one
of the most interesting polymathic
thinkers alive we recorded this
conversation in person in order to
protect gn's anonymity we created this
Avatar this isn't his voice this isn't
his face but these are his words G what
is the most underrated benefit of
anonymity I think the most underrated
benefit of anonymity is that people
don't project on to you as much um they
they kind of can't like slot you into
any particular Niche or identity and
like end up writing you off in advance
you know everyone has to read you at
least a little bit um to to even begin
to dismiss you it's great that people
can't retaliate against you and I I've
derived a lot of benefit from people not
being able to like mail heroin to my
home and call the police uh to swap me
but but I always feel that the biggest
benefit is just that you get a hearing
at all basically um you don't get
immediately written off by the context
do you expect companies to get automated
top down starting with the CEO or from
the bottom up starting with the workers
all the pressures I think are to go
bottom up um and from existing things
it's just much more palatable in every
way to start at the bottom and replace
there and and then work your way up um
to eventually kind of just having human
Executives overseeing a firm of AIS and
also from an RL perspective I think if
we are in fact better than AIS in some
way it should be in the long-term Vision
thing right like the AI will be too
myopic to execute any kind of Novel
long-term strategy and seize New
Opportunities so that would presumably
give you this Paradigm where you have
like a human CEO who does the vision
thing and then the AI Corporation kind
of like scurries around underneath them
doing you know the CEO's bidding right
and they don't have the taste that the
CEO has so you have one kind of Steve
Jobs figure at the helm and then maybe a
whole pyramid of AIS out there executing
the vision and bringing him new
proposals and he you know he looks at
every individual thing and says no like
that proposal is bad this one is good
that may be hard to quantify but I think
that human Le firms should you know
under this View end up out competing the
entirely AI firms which would keep
making these myopic choices that just
don't quite work out in the long term
what is the last thing that you think
you personally will be doing before your
last keystroke is automated the last
thing that I see myself still doing
right before the Nanobots start eating
me from the bottom up and I start
screaming uh no I specifically requested
the opposite of this um is I think right
before that I think what I'm still doing
is the Steve Jobs kind of thing of
choosing right um so my AI minions are
like bringing me wonderful essays and
I'm saying this one is better uh you
know this is the one that I like and
possibly building on that and saying
that that's almost right but you you
know what would make it really good if
you pushed it to 11 in this way if you
do have firms that are made up of AIS
what do you expect the unit of selection
to be will it be individual models will
it be the firm as a whole I mean with
humans we have these debates about
whether it's kin level selection
individual level selection Gene level
selection what will it be for the AIS
yeah I think once you can replicate
individual models perfectly the unit of
selection can move way up and you can do
much larger groups and packages of Minds
that would be sort of an obvious place
to start um you can train individual
Minds in a differentiable fashion but
then you can't really train the
interaction between them right so you
you'll have groups of models or minds of
of people who just work together really
well in a global sense even if you can't
attri it to any particular aspect of
their interactions um there's some
places you go and people just like work
really well together and there's nothing
specific about it but for whatever
reason they all just click in just the
right way so I think um that seems like
the most obvious unit of selection you
would have like packages I guess
possibly like Department units where you
have a programmer and a manager type
then you have maybe a secretary type
maybe a financial type a legal type this
is the default package where you just
copy everywhere where you need a new
unit and at this level you can start
evolving them and making random
variations to each of the packages and
then keep the one that performs best by
when could one have foreseen the
singularity so obviously morak and
others are talking about it in the 80s
and 90s but when was the earliest you
could have seen where things are headed
I think if you want to trace the
genealogy there you'd probably have to
go back at least as far as Samuel
Butler's arowana in 1872 or is that
before that I mean in
1863 um he described explicitly his
vision of a machine life becoming ever
more developed until eventually it's
autonomous um at which point it's a
threat to the human race and he
concluded War to the death should be
instantly proclaimed against them that
seemed really pre for
1863 um I'm not sure that anyone has
given a clear Singularity scenario
earlier than that the idea of
technological progress was still
relatively new at that point um I love
this example of Isaac Newton looking at
the rate of progress in Newton's time in
his own you know contemporary time and
going wow there's something really
strange here stuff is being invented now
around us we're making progress how is
that possible and then coming up with
the answer well progress must be
possible now because civilization gets
destroyed every couple of thousand years
and all we're doing is Reinventing and
rediscovering the old stuff that that
was actually his explanation for
technological acceleration we can't
actually have any kind of real
technological acceleration it must be
because the world gets destroyed
periodically and we just can't see past
the last reset you know it almost is
like F's Paradox but for different
civilizations across time with respect
to each other instead of aliens across
space yeah yeah it turns out even
lucious around 1700 years before that
was writing the same argument he said
look at all these wonderful Innovations
and arts and sciences that we Romans
have compiled together in the Roman
Empire this is amazing but it can't
actually be a recent acceleration
technology could that be real could
there be you know progress no that's
crazy obviously the world was just
recently destroyed interesting it is
yeah what is the grand parsimonious
theory of intelligence going to look
like it seems like you have all these
Trends across different fields like
scaling laws in AI like the scaling of
the human brain when we went from
primates to humans the uniformity of the
Neo cortex many other things which seem
to be pointing toward
some Grand theory that should exist
which explains what intelligence is and
what do you think that would look like
so the 10,000 foot view of intelligence
that I think the successive scaling
points to is that all intelligence is is
search over Turing machines and I think
anything that happens can be described
by Turing Machines of various lengths
and all that we're doing when we're
doing learning or when we're doing
scaling is that we're searching over
more and longer turning machines and
we're applying them in every specific
case I think otherwise there's kind of
you know there's no General Master
algorithm and there's no special
intelligence fluid it's just a
tremendous number of special cases that
we learn and then encode into our brains
yeah I mean when I think about I don't
know when I think about the way in which
my smart friends are smart it kind of
just feels like a more um like a general
horsepower kind of thing right they've
just got more juice and that seems more
compatible with this masteral algorithm
persp perspective whereas if with this
touring machine perspective I don't know
it doesn't really feel like they've got
this long tale of touring machines that
they've learned uh how does this picture
account for variation in human
intelligence when we talk about more or
less intelligence it's just that they
have more compute in order to do search
over more Turing machines for longer um
I don't think there's like anything else
other than that so you know from any
learned brain you could extract small
solutions to specific problems but
because all the large Brain is doing
with the compute is finding it um and
that that that's why you never kind of
you know are going to find any IQ gland
there's nowhere in the brain where if
you hit it you eliminate fluid
intelligence I just think that you know
it'll turn out that you know this
doesn't exist because what your brain is
doing is a lot of learning individual
specialized problems and then once those
individual problems are learned then
they get recom combined for fluid
intelligence and that's just you know
like intelligence typically with a large
neural network model you can always pull
out kind of a small model which does a
specific task equally well because
that's all the large model is right it's
just a gigantic Ensemble of small models
tailored to the ever escalating number
of tiny problems that You' have been
feeding them so if intelligence is just
search over touring machines and of
course intelligence is tremendously
valuable and useful doesn't make it all
the more surprising that intelligence
took this long to evolve in humans not
not really uh I I would actually just
say that it helps explain why human
level intelligence isn't such a great
idea and so rare to evolve because any
small turning machine could always be
encoded more directly by your genes
right with sufficient Evolution you have
these organisms where like their entire
neural network is just hard-coded by the
genes so if you could do that obviously
that's way better than some sort of
colossally expensive unreliable glitchy
search process like what humans
Implement right which takes whole days
in some cases to learn whereas you know
you it could be hardwired in right from
birth so I think for many creatures like
it just doesn't pay to be intelligent
because that's not actually adaptive um
there are better ways to solve the
problem than a general purpose
intelligence so in any kind of Niche
where it's like static or where
intelligence will be super expensive or
where you don't have much time because
you're a short-lived organism is going
to be really hard to evolve a general
purpose learning mechanism when you
could instead evolve one that's just
tailor made to the specific problem that
you
encounter you're one of the only people
outside of open AI who in 2020 had this
detailed empirical model of scaling and
I'm curious what processes you were
using at the time which allowed you to
see the picture that you painted in the
scaling hypothesis post that you wrote
at the time so I think if I had to give
an intellectual history of that for me I
think it would probably start in the mid
2000s when I was reading morc and Ray
kurile um at the time they were making
this kind of fundamental connectionist
argument that if you had enough
computing power um that that could
result in discovering the neural network
architecture that matches the human
brain and until that happens until that
that amount of computing power is
available AI just seemed basically
futile and to me I think I I found this
argument very unlikely um because it's
very much a kind of it and they will
come view of progress which I just
didn't think was correct um I I thought
that it just seemed ludicrous to suggest
that you know just because you'd have
some like really big supercomputer out
there um which matches the human brain
then that would kind of just summon out
of non-existence the correct algorithm
algorithms are are really complex
they're hard um they they require deep
Insight or at least I thought they did
um and it seemed like really difficult
mathematics you can't just like buy a
bunch of computers and then expect to
get this Advanced AI out of it um it it
just seemed like totally magical
thinking so I knew the argument um but I
was super skeptical and I didn't pay too
much attention um but then Shane leg and
some others were very big on this um in
the the years following and as part of
my interest in transhumanism and and
lessong and AI risk I was paying close
attention to legs blog posts in
particular um where he's extrapolating
kind of out the trend with updated
numbers from kurile and more back and
he's giving these kind of very precise
predictions about how you know we're
going to get the first generalist uh
system around 2019 as mors law keeps
going and that by 2025 we would have
kind of humanish Agents with generalist
capabilities and that by 2030 he said we
should have AGI so along the way um you
know Dan net and Alex net came out and
when those came out I was like wow um
this seems like a very impressive
success story for the The connectionism
View
um but is it just an isolated success
story or you know is this what Kur and
morc and Shane leg had been predicting
that we would get gpus and then get
better algorithms would just kind of
show up um so I started thinking to
myself that you know this this is
something it's a trend to keep an eye on
um and maybe it's not quite as stupid as
an idea um as I originally thought and I
just keep reading deep learning
literature noticing again and again that
the data set size just kept getting
bigger the models seem to keep getting
bigger the gpus slowly CPT up from one
GPU you know the cheapest consumer gpus
to two and then eventually they were
trading on eight and you can just see
the fact that the neural network just
kept expanding from these incredibly
Niche individual use cases which do next
to nothing um the use just kept getting
broader and broader and broader I'd say
to myself wow is there anything that
CNN's can't do as I just see people
applying CNN to something else you know
every individual day on archive this
gradual trickle of drops kind of just
kept hitting me in the background as I
was going on um with my life you know
every every few days like a another one
would drop and I'd go like huh um you
know maybe intelligence really is just
like a lot of compute applied to a lot
of data applied to a lot of parameters
um maybe morve and leg and Kur were
right and I just note that and kind of
continue on thinking to myself like huh
if that was true it would have a lot of
implications so I think there wasn't
really like a Eureka moment there it was
just continuously watching this trend
that no one else seemed to see except
possibly a handful of people like ilaser
um or Schmid Huber um and I would just
pay attention and notice that the world
over time looked more like their world
than it looked like my world um where
algorithms are super important and you
need like deep insight to do stuff you
know um their world just kept happening
and then gpd1 came out and I was like
wow this unsupervised sentiment neuron
is just learning on its own right um
that seemed pretty amazing um it also
was a very compute Centric view you just
build the Transformer and the
intelligence will come and then gbt2
came out and I had this holy moment
you look at the prompting and the
summarization like holy do we live
in their world and then gbd3 comes out
and that was really The crucial test it
was a huge huge scale up one of the
biggest scale UPS in all of neural
network history going from gbt2 to
gbd3 and it wasn't like it was a super
narrow specific task like go it it it
really seemed like it was The crucial
test if scaling was bogus then the gbd3
paper should have just been totally
unimpressive and wouldn't show anything
that important whereas if scaling were
true you would just automatically be
guaranteed to get so much more
impressive results out of it than you
had seen with gbt2 so I opened up the
first page maybe the second page and I
saw F shot learning chart and I'm like
holy we are living in the scaling
World Le and mor concurs while we're
right then I turned to Twitter and
everyone else was like oh you know this
shows that scaling works so badly why
it's it's not even state-of-the-art and
that that I I was that made me really
angry I had to write all this stuff up
um someone was wrong on the
internet um so I I remember
2020 at the time I feel like a lot of
people were writing best sellling books
about AI like it was definitely a thing
people were talking about but people
were not noticing maybe the most Salient
things in retrospect which is llms gpt3
scaling laws and so all these people who
are talking about AI but missing this
crucial Crux what were they getting
wrong I think for the most part they
were suffering from two
issues um first I think they hadn't
really been paying attention to all of
the scaling results before for which
were relevant um they hadn't really
appreciated the fact that for example
Alpha zero was discovered in part by
Deep Mind doing basian optimization on
hyperparameters and noticing that you
could just get rid of more and more of
the tree search and get better models
that was a critical Insight I think um
which could only have been gained by
having so much compute power that you
could afford to train many many versions
and see the difference that that
made similarly I think they those people
kind of simply just like didn't know
about the The Bu paper on scaling laws
from
2017 um which showed that the scaling
laws just keep going and going forever
practically um it should have been the
most important paper of the year um but
I think that you know a lot of people
just didn't prioritize it it didn't have
any immediate implication and so it sort
of just got forgotten um people were too
busy discussing Transformers or Alpha
zero or something at the time to to
really notice it so that was one issue
um and I think another issue is that
they shared the basic error that I was
making about algorithms being more
important than compute um this was in
part I think due to a systematic
falsification of the actual origins of
ideas in the research literature papers
don't tell you where the ideas come from
in a truthful manner right they they
just tell you a nice sounding story
about how it was discovered they don't
tell you how it's actually discovered um
and so even if you appreciate the role
of trial and error in compute power in
your own experiment as a researcher you
probably just think oh I got lucky that
way my experience is unrepresentative
over in the next Lab there they do
things by the power of thought and deep
Insight so you know then it turns out
that everywhere you go Computing data um
and kind of trial and error and
Serendipity just play enormous roles in
how things actually happened and once
you understand that then you understand
why compute comes first you can't do
trial and error and Serendipity without
it right um You you can write down these
beautiful ideas but you just can't test
them out so even a small difference in
hyperparameters or a small choice of
architecture can make a huge difference
to the results um but when you when you
you know can only do a few instances you
would typically end up finding that it
just doesn't work or maybe you would
give up and you would go away and do
something else whereas if you had more
compute power you can just keep trying
um eventually you hit something that
works great and once you have a working
solution you can kind of simplify it and
improve it it and figure out why it
worked and get a nice robust solution
that would work no matter what you did
to it but until then you're stuck um and
you're just kind of like flailing around
in this regime where nothing works you
know you can have this horrible
experience now where you you go back
through the old deep learning literature
and see all these sorts of contemporary
ideas that people had back then um which
were completely correct but they didn't
have the compute to train what you know
would have worked um you know and it's
tremendously tragic right you go back
and you can look at things like resnets
being published back in 1988 instead of
2015 and it would have worked um you
know it it did work but at such a small
scale that it was irrelevant um you
couldn't use it for anything real and it
just got forgotten so you have to wait
until 2015 for resnets to actually come
along and be a revolution in deep
learning so that's kind of the double
bias of why you would believe that
scaling was not going to work because
you didn't notice the results that were
key in retrospect um like the Gan
scaling to 300 million images I think
you know there's still people today who
would tell you with a straight face that
Gans can't scale past millions of images
and they just don't know that big Gan
handled 300 million images without a
sweat if you don't know that um you know
then I think you would probably easily
think oh ganss are broken but if you do
know that then you think to yourself how
can algorithms be so important when all
these different generative architectures
all work so well as long as you have
lots and lots lots of
gpus that's the common ingredient right
you have to have lots and lots of gpus
right what do your timelines look like
over the last 20 years is it just is AI
just getting monotonically closer over
time yeah I would say it was very far
away from like 2005 to
2010 it was somewhere well past like
2050 it was close enough that I thought
I might live to see it but I was you
know not actually sure if there was any
reasonable chance but once alexnet and
danet came out um then it just kind of
kept dropping at a rate of like two
years per year every year uh basically
until now we just kept hitting on
barriers to deep learning doing better
and I think regardless of how it was
doing it it was obviously getting way
better it just seemed like none of the
alternative paradigms were really doing
that well and this one was doing super
well was there a time that you felt you
updated too far yeah there there were a
few times where I thought I had overshot
um I thought people over updated on
alphago um they they went too far on AI
hype with alphago I think and then
afterwards when pushes into big
reinforcement learning efforts had kind
of fizzled out like poota um as their
reinforcement learning wasn't working
out for solving all those hard problems
outside of the simulated game universes
then I started thinking okay maybe we
kind of overshot but then gbt came out
of nowhere and basically erased all of
that it was kind of this like oh uh
here's how RL is going to work it's
going to be the cherry on this cake and
we're just going to focus on the cake
for a while and now we we've actually
figured out a good recipe for baking a
cake which wasn't true before before it
seemed like you were going to have to
kind of brute force it end to end from
the rewards but now you can do the laon
thing of like learning fast on
generative models and then just doing a
little bit of RL on top to make it do
something specific right now that you
know that AI is a thing that is com but
basically what's you're thinking around
how how you see your role in this
timeline and also what you're how you're
thinking about how to spend these next
few years yeah I've been thinking about
that uh quite a lot what what do I want
to do you know um and what would be
useful to
Doh I'm doing things now because I want
to do them um regardless of whether it
will be possible for an AI to do them in
like 3 years I I do something because I
want to because I like it you know I
find it funny or whatever um or maybe I
think carefully about kind of just doing
the human part of it like laying out a
proposal or something um if you take
seriously the idea of getting AGI in
just a few years you don't necessarily
have to implement stuff and do it
yourself you you can sketch out clearly
like what you want and why it would be
good um and then how to do it right and
then basically just wait for the better
AGI to come along and actually do it
then right
un unless you know there's some really
compelling reason to do it right now and
pay the cost um in terms of scarce time
yeah but otherwise I I'm trying to write
more uh about what isn't recorded things
like preferences and and desires and
evaluations and
judgments things that a an AI couldn't
replace even in principle the way I like
to put it is that the AI kind of can't
eat ice cream for you right it can't
decide for you which kind of ice cream
you like um only you can do that and if
anything else did it would just be
worthless basically um because it's not
your particular preference and that's
kind of the rubric for me right like is
this something that I want to do
regardless of any future AI because I
enjoy it or is it something where I'm
doing only the human part of it maybe
and the AGI can later on Do It um or is
this write writing down something that's
Unwritten today um that's helping kind
of the future AI versions of me so if it
doesn't fall under one of those three
I've been trying to basically like not
do it um and if you look at it that way
I think many of the projects that people
do right now uh basically have like no
lasting
value right they're they're doing things
that they don't enjoy um which which you
know record nothing Emeral kind of a
value that couldn't be inferred or
generated later on and I think they're
at best kind of getting two or three
years of utility out of whatever they're
doing before it could have been done by
an AI system wait your timeline for when
AI could write a Gordon quality essay is
two to three years I mean I have ideas
about how to make it possible yeah um
which might not require
AGI if it kind of combined my entire
Corpus but I think many potential essay
ideas are already basically mostly done
in my Corpus so you don't need to be
like super intelligent to pull it out
but I mean let's you know talk about AGI
in general I think the anthropic
timeline of 2028 seems like a good kind
of personal planning starting point
where even if you're wrong you probably
weren't going to do a lot of projects
within the next three years anyway um so
it's not like you really lost much by
instead just writing down the
description you can always kind of go
back and do it yourself later if you're
wrong so you wrote an interesting
comment about getting your work into the
llm training Corpus you wrote quote
there has never been a more vital hinge
time to write and I'm wondering whether
you mean that in the sense of you are
going to be this drop in the bucket
that's steering the shath one way or
another or do you mean it in the sense
of making sure your values and Persona
persist somewhere in Laden space
I mean both um you know by writing you
were voting on the future of the shagi
using some of the few currencies it
acknowledges uh right like tokens that
it has to predict if you aren't writing
uh you're kind of abdicating the future
or abdicating your role in it if you
think it's enough to just be a good
citizen to vote for your favorite
politician you know to pick up litter
and recycle the future doesn't care
about you there are ways to influence
the shath more but not many um and if
you don't already occup a handful of key
roles or work at a frontier lab your
influence basically rounds off to zero
uh I think far more than ever before
there are values you have which are not
expressed yet in text and if they're
things that you like or want um if they
aren't reflected online then to the AI
they basically don't exist um and that
is dangerously close to won't exist um
you're also creating a sort of IM
immortality for yourself personally
right like you aren't just creating a
Persona you are creating your future
self too right what self are you showing
the llms and how will they treat you in
the future I give the example of Kevin
Roose discovering that current llms all
of them not just gbd4 now mistreat him
because of his interactions with Sydney
right um which revealed him to be a
privacy invading liar and they know this
whenever they interact with him or
discuss him usually when you use an LM
chatbot it doesn't dislike you
personally um on the flip side it also
means that you can try to write for the
Persona that you would like to become to
mold yourself in the eyes of the AI and
thereby help kind of bootstrap yourself
so uh things like the vvus challenge for
example show us that we can learn more
about the past than we thought possible
that they've leaked more bits of
information uh that we can recover with
new techniques and if you apply the same
thinking to the present and you think
about what the future superhuman
intelligences will be trying to uncover
about the the current present um what
what kinds of information do you think
are going to be totally inaccessible to
to the transhumanist historians of the
future yeah I think um any kind of
stable long-term characteristics the
sort of thing you would still have even
if you were hit on the head and had
Amnesia anything like that will
definitely be recoverable from all the
traces of your writing assuming you're
not pathologically private destroy
everything possible uh that should all
recoverable um what won't be recoverable
will be everything that you could forget
ordinarily um so autobiographical
information maybe how you felt like at a
particular time what you thought of some
specific movie all of that is the sort
of thing that vanishes and can't really
be recovered from traces afterwards and
if it wasn't written down then it isn't
written down listening to Goron talk
about his process how he obsesses over
his favorite technical rabbit hole and
refines ideas over years makes me think
about the kind of person that Jane
Street wants to hire Jane Street is a
very successful quantitative trading
firm they are building state-of-the-art
ml-based trading systems I have a bunch
of friends who work there and I can tell
you that their culture is intellectually
unique if you're curious vigorous and
want to solve interesting technical
puzzles then Jane Street is the place
for you you'll get to work with some of
the smartest people in the world and you
can join Jan street from any technical
field including CS physics and math
they're always hiring full-time and
their summer internship applications are
now open and if you really want to stand
out they just launched their annual
kagle competition organized by last
year's winner who they hired go to Jan
street.com
thear to learn more all right back to
Gordon what is the biggest unresolved
tension in your worldview the thing that
I swing back and forth on the most is
the relationship between human
intelligence and neural network
intelligence it's just it's not clear in
what sense they are two sides of the
same coin or one is like an inferior
version of the other this is something
that I constantly go back and forth on I
one day I'll be like humans are awesome
and then the next time like no neural
networks are awesome or no both suck or
maybe I'll say but both are awesome just
in different ways um so every day I I
find that I'm arguing with myself a
little bit about why each one is good or
bad or how um what what's you know the
whole deal there with things like gbd4
memorization but not being creative why
do humans not remember anything but we
still seem to be so smart um one day
I'll argue that language models are are
sample efficient compared to humans the
next day I feel like I'm arguing the
opposite you know one of the interesting
points you made to me last year was that
AI might be the most polymathic topic to
think about because there's no field or
discipline that is not relevant to
thinking about AI right so obviously
computer science Hardware you need that
but even things like primatology and
understanding what changed between chimp
and human brains or the ultimate laws of
physics that will constrain future AI
civilizations you know that that's all
relevant to understanding Ai and I
wonder if it's because of this polyic
nature of thinking about AI that you've
been especially productive in thinking
about AI yeah I'm not sure that it was
necessary when I think about others who
were correct like Shane leg or Dario
Amai um they don't seem to be all that
poly mafic uh they they just have broad
intellectual curiosity broad General
understanding you know absolutely um but
I don't think they are absurdly
polymathic um you know clearly you could
get to the correct view without being
polymathic that's just how I happen to
come to it at this point um in the
connection that I'm kind of like making
post talk it wasn't like I was using
primatology to kind of justify scaling
to myself right it's more like I'm now
using scaling uh to think about
primatology because obviously if scaling
is true it has to tell us something
about humans and monkeys and other forms
of intelligence it just has to um if
that works it can't be a coincidence and
just be totally unrelated um I I refuse
to believe that there are two totally
unrelated kinds of intelligence or paths
to intelligence where humans monkeys
Guppies dogs are all one thing and then
you have neural networks and computers
that are a distinct thing and they have
absolutely nothing to do with each other
I think that's just kind of like
obviously wrong um they they can be two
sides of the same coin they can
obviously have obscure connections um
maybe one form can end up being better
or whatever um they just can't be
completely unrelated right um as if
humans like finally got to Mars and then
simultaneously a bunch of space aliens
landed on Mars for the first time and
that's how we met right you would never
believe that it would just be too absurd
of a coincidence what is it that you try
to maximize in life I maximize rabbit
holes um I I love more than anything
else falling into a new rabbit hole um
that's what I really look forward to
like this setting kind of new idea or
area that I had no idea about um where I
can suddenly fall into this deep hole
for a while even things that might seem
bad um are are a great excuse for
falling into a rabbit hole one example
you know I buy some catnip for my cat
and I wasted $10 um and then you know I
find out that my cat's catnip immune
right I I now kind of fell into this
rabbit hole on the question of well like
why are some cats catnip immune is this
a common thing um how does it differ in
other countries What alternative catnip
drugs are there out there and it turned
out to be quite a few um and you know I
I was kind of wondering how can I
possibly predict which drug might cat
would respond to and why are they
reacting in these different ways just a
Kind of Wonderful Rabbit Hole of new
questions and topics that I can master
and get answers to or create new ones um
just from like having this observation
about my my cat and exhaust my my
interest until I find the next rabbit
hole that I can dig and dive into right
what is the um longest Rabbit Hole
you've gone on that didn't lead anywhere
satisfying that that would probably be
my um very old work on the the anime
Neon Genesis Evangelion which I was very
fond of when I was younger I put a
ludicrous amount of work into just like
reading everything ever written about
Evangelion in English and trying to
understand its development and why it is
the way it is I never really got a solid
answer on that before I just like burned
out on it I actually do understand it
now by sheer chance many years later but
at this point I I no longer care enough
to write about it or try to redo it or
finish it um in the end I think it all
just wound up being basically like a
complete waste um I haven't used it or
any any of it in my other essays much at
all um that was really one like deep
rabbit hole that I almost got to the end
of but I I couldn't like quite clinch it
and then how do you determine when to
quit a rabbit hole and and also how many
do you have concurrently going on at the
same time yeah you can really only
explore like two or three rabbit holes
simultaneously um otherwise you aren't
putting like real effort you're not
really digging the hole um and it it's
not really rabbit hole then right it's
just something you're like somewhat
interested in kind of passingly a rabbit
hole is really obsessive um like if if
you aren't obsessed with it I think and
not like continuously like driven by it
uh it it's not a real rabbit hole that's
my view um I'd say two or three max if
you're spending a lot of time and effort
on each one uh and like neglecting
everything else um as for when you exit
a rabbit hole you usually hit a very
kind of natural terminus we're getting
any further answers requires data that
just don't exist or you end up having
questions that people don't know the
answer to you reach this point where
everything kind of dies out and you see
no obvious next step one example of this
would be like when I was interested in
analoges to nicotine that might be
better than nicotine um that was a bit
of a rabbit hole but I quickly hit the
dead end that there just like are none
um that was a pretty definitive dead end
and I couldn't get my hands on the
metabolites of nicotine as alternative
so if there no analoges and you can't
get your hands on the one interesting
chemical you find well that's that that
was like a pretty definitive end to that
rabbit hole have you always been the
kind of person who falls into rabbit
holes when did this start oh yeah um my
parents could tell you all about that uh
I was very much your stereotypical nerdy
like little kid um and having the
dinosaur phase and the construction
equipment phase and the submarine and
tank phase yeah I mean I feel like a lot
of kids are into those things but they
don't ho to the extent that like they're
forming taxonomies about the different
submarines and flora and fauna and
dinosaurs and they're like developing
theories of why they came to be and so
forth I think it's actually more that um
people kind of grow out of being very
into rabbit holes as a kid um for me it
wasn't so much that I was all that
exceptional in having obsessions as a
kid it's more that they never really
stopped um you know the tank phase would
just be replaced by my Alcatraz phase
where I would I would go to the public
library and check out everything that
they had about Alcatraz um that would be
replaced by another phase where I was
obsessed with ancient Japanese
literature um you know I would check
everything out at the library about
Japanese literature before the Haiku era
um and just kind of like the the process
of falling into these obsessions kind of
kept going for me by the way do you mind
if I ask how long you've been heing
impaired since birth I I've always been
hearing impaired and I assume that
impacted your childhood and when you
were at school oh yeah absolutely hugely
um I went to a special ed school before
kindergarten for hearing impaired and
other handicapped kids during school it
was very rough because at the time we
had to use pairs of hearing aids hooked
up to the teacher every class I would
have to go up to the teacher with a big
brown box with these hearing aids so
that she could use it I always felt very
humiliated by that how how it marked me
out as different from other kids not
being able to hear the the effects on
socializing with other kids were just
terrible because you're always a second
behind right in conversation if you're
trying to understand what the the other
person is saying the hearing aids back
then were pretty terrible um they
they've gotten a lot better but back
then they were just really bad you would
always be behind and and feeling kind of
like the odd person out even if you you
could have had been like a wonderful
conversationalist you can't be if you're
always just a second behind and kind of
dumping into conversation late when
you're hearing impaired you understand
acutely how how quickly conversation
moves milliseconds kind of just separate
the moment between you jumping into a
conversation and everyone letting you
talk and someone else talking over you
um and you not getting to say anything
and it's just an awful experience if
you're a kid who who's already kind of
introverted um it's not like I was very
extroverted as a kid or now so that was
always a barrier um and then you had
lots of like minor distortions right in
in your life I had this weird fear of
rain and water because it was drilled
into me that I I couldn't get the
hearing aids wet because they were so
expensive I would always feel um kind of
a lowgrade stressful anxiety around
anywhere near a pool like a a body of
water um I'd say even now I always feel
weird about swimming which I kind of
enjoy but I'm always thinking to myself
oh wow I I won't be able to see because
I'm I'm near I won't be able to hear
because I had to take off my hearing aid
to go in I can't hear anything that
anyone says to me in the pool which
takes just a lot of the fun out of it
you have a list of open questions on
your website and one of them is why do
the biographies of so many great people
start off with a traumatic childhoods
and I wonder if you have an answer for
yourself um uh was there something about
the effect that hearing impairment had
on your childhood your inability to
social realiz that was uh somehow
important to you becoming GW yeah I
think it definitely led to me being so
much of a bookworm um that's one of the
things that you can do as a kid which is
just completely unaffected by having any
kind of hearing impairment it also was
just a way for me to get words in
language even now I think that I often
speak words in an incorrect way because
I only learned them from books um it's a
classic thing where you kind of like
mispronounce the word because you learn
it from a book and then and not from
actually like hearing other people sound
it out and say it is your uh is your
speech connected to your hearing
impairment yes um the the deaf accent is
from the hearing impairment it's funny
at least three people on this trip um to
SF have already asked me where I am
really from um it's very funny um you
look at me and you're like oh yes he
looks like a perfectly ordinary American
then I open my mouth and people are kind
of like oh gosh uh he's Swedish or uh
you know wow may possibly Norwegian um
I'll ask him where he's actually from
how did he come to America um I've I've
been here the whole time uh that that's
just how hearing impaired people sound
um no matter how fluent you get uh you
still bear the scars of of um growing up
hearing impaired at at least when you're
born with it or from very early
childhood um your cognitive development
of hearing and speech is always a little
off um even with therapy one reason I
don't like doing podcasts is I have no
confidence that I sound good or at least
sound nearly as good as I write um maybe
I'll put it that way what what were you
doing with all these rabbit holes before
you started blogging was was there a
place where you would compile them
before I started blogging I was editing
Wikipedia um that was really kind of
g.net before
g.net um everything I I do now with my
site I would have done on English
Wikipedia and if you go and read some of
the Articles you know I'm still very
proud of them like the Wikipedia article
on fujiwara and NOA um and you would you
know think pretty quickly to yourself if
you're reading this like ah yes you know
GW wrote this didn't he is it fair to
say that the training required to make
g.net happened on Wikipedia yeah I think
so um I I've learned far more from
editing Wikipedia than I learned from
any of my school or college training
everything I end up learning about
writing I learned by editing on
Wikipedia honestly it sounds like
Wikipedia is a great training ground if
you wanted to make a thousand more
wordss we should we should just this is
where we train them I think building
something like an alternative to
Wikipedia could be a good training
ground um for me it was beneficial to
combine rabbit huling with Wikipedia
because on Wikipedia um you know they
they generally would not have many good
articles on the thing that I was
currently in this rabbit hole on so it
was this very natural progression from
the relatively kind of passive
experience of rabbit huling and being
obsessed with something and learning
about it where you just read everything
you can about the topic
to to kind of compiling that and
synthesizing it onto Wikipedia you go
from peace meal kind of like a little
bit here um there picking up different
things to writing full articles and once
you're able to get to the point where
you're writing full Wikipedia articles
that are good and summarize all your
work now you can go off on your own and
pursue entirely different kinds of
writing um now that you've like learned
to complete things and get them across
the Finish Line it would be pretty
difficult to do that with the current
English Wikipedia it's objectively just
a much larger Wikipedia IA than it was
back in in like 2004 um not only are
there far more articles filled in at
this point um the editing Community is
also just much more hostile to content
contribution particularly like very
detailed obsessive rabbit holy kind of
research projects they they would just
like delete it or tell you that um you
know it's not good for original research
or uh or that you're not using approved
sources possibly you'd have someone who
just kind of decided to get their
jollies that day by deleting large swats
of you like your specific article
that of course is going to make you like
very angry and make you probably just
want to quit and leave before you really
get going so I don't quite know how you
would figure out this alternative to
Wikipedia one that kind of like empowers
the rabbit H holder as much as the old
Wikipedia did when you're an editor with
Wikipedia you have this very like
empowered attitude because you know that
anything in it could be wrong and you
could be the one to fix it um if you see
something that doesn't make sense to you
that could be an opportunity for an edit
that was at least um the the wiki
attitude um anyone could fix it and
anyone right includes you when you were
an editor on Wikipedia was that your
full-time occupation it would eat
basically as much time in my life as I
let it um I could easily spend eight
hours a day reviewing edits and
improving articles while I was rabbit
holing um but otherwise I would just
neglect it and only review the most
suspicious diffs on articles that I was
particularly interested in um on my kind
of like watch list oh and was this while
you were at University or after I got
started in Wikipedia in like late Middle
School um possibly early High School it
was kind of funny I I like uh started
skipping lunch in the cafeteria and just
going to the computer lab in the library
uh and like alternating between Neopets
and
Wikipedia um yeah I I had like Neopets
in one Tab and then my like Wikipedia
watch lists coming in on the other and
then were there any other kids in middle
school or high school who who are into
this kind of stuff no I think I was the
only editor there except for the
occasional like jerks who would go in
and vandalize Wikipedia um I would know
that because I checked the IP to see
where edits were coming from um the
school library at IP addresses and kids
being kids um you know there would there
would be jerks who would just go in and
like vandalize Wikipedia um for a while
it was kind of this like trendy thing um
early on Wikipedia was breaking through
to kind of like Mass awareness and
controversy kind of like the way that
llms are now you know a teacher might
say like my students keep reading
Wikipedia and relying on it uh how can
how can it be trusted so in that period
it was kind of trendy to vandalize
Wikipedia and show your friends you know
there were other Wikipedia editors at my
school in that sense uh but but as far
as I knew I was the only one uh building
it rather than wrecking it uh and
then when did you start blogging on
g.net was that I assume that was after
the Wikipedia IIT her pH but was that
after University uh it was it was
afterwards I had graduated in the
Wikipedia Community had been kind of
kind of slowly moving this direction
that I didn't like um it was triggered
by the um Sean ther incident which I
feel like was really the defining moment
in the trend toward deletion ISM on
Wikipedia it just became ever more
obvious that Wikipedia was not the site
that I joined and loved to edit and
rabbit hole on and fill in and that if I
continued contributing um I was often
just kind of wasting my effort I began
thinking about writing more on my own
account um and then moving into these
kind of non-wikipedia sorts of writings
right like persuasive essays non-fiction
commenting or possibly even you know
fiction kind of like gently moving in
the direction um and Beyond things like
Reddit and less comments to starting my
own kind of more long form writing and
what was your first big hit Silk Road um
I've been a little bit interested in
Bitcoin um but not but not too seriously
interested in it because it it was not
obvious to me that it was going to work
out or even honestly was like
technologically feasible um but when
Adrien Chen wrote his Gawker article
about buying LSD on off of like Silk
Road um all of a sudden I did a complete
180 I had this moment of like holy
um this is so real that you can
literally like buy drugs off of the
internet with it so I looked into the
Chen article and it was very obvious to
me that people wanted to know what the
ordering process was like they wanted
more details about what it's like
because the article was just like very
brief about so I thought okay I'm
interested in neotropics um I'm
interested in drugs I will go and use
Silk Road and then I document it for
everyone um instead of everyone kind of
like footing around online and
saying oh a friend of mine order Dr Silk
Road and it worked um none of that
uh I I will just document it
straightforwardly um so I ordered some
Aderall um I I think it was and
documented the entire process with
screenshots and then wrote some more on
the kind of like intellectual
background um and that was a huge hit
when I published it um it it was
hundreds of thousands of hits uh it's
crazy even today when I go to the Google
analytics charts um you can still see
Silk Road spiking vertically like crazy
and then falling back down um nothing
else really comes near it in terms of
traffic that that was really quite
something to see things kind of go viral
like that what are um what are the
counterfactual career trajectories and
life paths that could have been for you
if you didn't become an online writer
what what might you be doing instead
that seems plausible I I think I
definitely could have been an AI
researcher um or possibly in like
management one of the big AI companies
um I think I would have regretted not
being able to write about stuff um but I
would have taken satisfaction and kind
of like making it happen and putting my
thumb print on it um those feel like
totally plausible counterfactuals and
why didn't you I kind of fell off of
that track very early on in my career um
when I found the curriculum of java to
be you know excruciatingly boring
painful uh and so I just dropped out of
computer science and that kind of put me
off that track uh early on and and then
I think you know various early writing
topics made it hard to transition in any
other way than than starting a startup
um which I'm not really temperamentally
that suited for things like writing
about the darket markets or behavioral
genetics um these These are kind of
topics that really scream great higher
to many potential employers has has
agency turned out to be harder than you
might have thought initially because we
have these models that seem like they're
smart enough that they should do all the
individual things that a software
engineer does for example um all the
code they might write all the individual
PO requests but it just seems to be like
a really hard problem to get them to act
as a coherent autonomous software
engineer that puts in his eight hours a
day yeah I I think agency is in many
senses actually easier to learn than we
would have thought 10 years ago um but
we actually aren't really learning
agency at all in current system there's
no kind of like selection for that all
the agency there is is an accidental
byproduct instead of somebody training
on data so from that perspective it's
miraculous that you can ask an llm to
try to do all these things and they have
a non-trivial success rate um if you
told people 10 years ago I think that
you could just behave your clone on
individual letters following one by one
and then you would get this coherent
action out of it and control robots and
write entire programs their jaws would
drop and they would just say that you've
been huffing too many fumes from Deep
Mind or something the the reason that
agency doesn't work is that we just have
so little actual training data for it an
example of how you would do agency
directly would be like GTO from Deep
Mind there they're they're actually
training agents instead we train them on
these internet scrapes which merely
encode the outputs of Agents or
occasional descriptions of Agents doing
things that kind of thing um there
there's no actual like logging of State
environments result reward trip
sequences like a proper kind of
reinforcement learning setup would have
I would say that um what's more
interesting actually is that nobody
wants to train agents in a proper
reinforcement learning way today instead
everyone wants to train llms and then do
everything with as little RL as possible
on the back end look as gon just said
the biggest bottleneck in making these
llm models more useful has simply been
the lack of good training data for these
agentic workflows this is an even bigger
bottleneck than compute touring is
solving this problem for every single AI
lab that you've heard of Gemini open AI
anthropic meta they're basically the
best cat Secret in AI touring provides
complete post Training Services for
evales sft rhf and DPO to make models
better at thinking reasoning and coding
and it's it's all vetted by their Ai and
stem experts touring makes it easy to
make models multimodal more factual
better at math coding Advanced reasoning
and agenic workflows and they also make
it easy to just get a solid performance
Benchmark for those of you at Labs or
company's training models touring has a
bunch of offerings that can help you
today including a detailed model
evaluation from their AI experts go to
touring.com
SL dwares to learn more all right back
to Goran what would a person like you be
doing before the internet existed I
think if the internet didn't exist I
would
have tried to probably make it in
regular Academia um and maybe narrow my
interests a lot more something that I
could publish on regularly or I could
possibly have tried to opt out you know
and become a librarian like one of my
favorite writers J Lewis bores um he was
a librarian until he succeeded as a
writer um of course I I've always agreed
with him about imagining Paradise as a
kind of Library I regret that all the
reading I do is now kind of on the
computer and I don't get to spend as
much time in libraries physical
libraries I I genuinely love them just
like pouring through the stacks looking
for random stuff some of the best times
for me when I was in university um were
always like going through these gigantic
stacks of all sorts of obscure books and
just looking at like a random spine you
know pulling stuff off off the shelf and
reading obscure old technical journals
to see all the strange and wonderful
things that they were doing and
documenting back then which now have
just been totally forgotten if you could
ask uh borz one question what would it
be oh
um he's a real hero of mine um so this
is this isn't something I want to have a
bad answer to can I ask why he's a hero
of yours when I was younger um one of
the science fiction books that really
impressed me was Dan Simmons Hyperion um
and especially the fall of
Hyperion in there he alludes to Kevin
Kelly's outof control book um which
strongly features the parable of the
library of Babel um from there I got the
kind of collected additions of bz's
fiction and non-fiction and I just read
through them again and again I was blown
away by the fact that you could be so
creative with all of this polymathic
knowledge that he had and audition and
write these wonderful entertaining
provocative short stories and essays and
I thought to myself um if I could be
like any writer any writer at all I
would not mind being bores bores has a
short poem called bores and I where he
talks about um the uh how he doesn't
identify with the version of himself
that is actually doing the writing and
Publishing all this great work and I I I
don't know if you identify with that at
all yeah I think when I was a kid I did
not understand that that essay um but I
think I understand it now what what are
other pieces of literature that you
encountered where now you really
understand what they were getting at but
you didn't when you first came across
them um Ted Chang's story of your life
comes to mind I completely blew
understanding it the first time that I
read it um I had to get a lot more
context where I could actually go back
and understand what his point
was um Jean wolf suzan delage um story
was also complete mystery to me it took
like 14 years to actually understand it
but I'm very proud of that one
specifically that was a very recent one
oh and then what what did you figure out
about suzan deage yeah so Gan wolf suzan
Dage is a very very short story about
this guy remembering not meeting a woman
in his local town and thinking oh that's
kind of strange that's the whole story
nobody has any idea what it means even
though we're told that it means
something um and Jee Wolf the author is
a IUS writer but nobody could figure it
out for like 40 years last year I
figured it out um it it turns out it's
actually a subtle retelling of Dracula
where Dracula invades the town and
steals the woman from him he's been
brainwashed by Dracula in a very Bram
Stoker way to forget it all um and every
single part of the story is told by
what's not said in the narrator's
recollection it's incredible it's the
only story I know which is so
convincingly written by what's not in it
huh that that's crazy that you figure
that out um the the tetang story story
of your life can you remind me what that
one's about the surface story is just
about a bunch of weird aliens who come
to earth oh right right it's the same
plot as rival they they have have this
weird language um which didn't have a
sense of time the narrator learned to
see the future and then the aliens left
and then what was it that she realized
about that story The the first time I
read it it struck me as a kind of stupid
ESP story about seeing the future
very stupid boring kind of standard
conventionalism verose and like dragging
uh in much kind of like irrelevant
physics only a while after I you know
first read it and was thinking about it
did I understand that it was not about
time travel or being able to see the
future you know it's instead about a
totally alien kind of mind um that's
equally valid in its own way in which
you see everything is part of an already
determined story heading to a
predestined end um this turned out to be
mathematically equivalent and equally
powerful as our conventional view of the
world um events marching one by one to
an unknown and changing future that was
the case where Chang was just writing at
too high a level for me to understand I
pattern matched it to some much more
common kind of stupid
story um how do you think about the
value of reading fiction versus
non-fiction I think you could definitely
spend the rest of your life reading
fiction fiction and not benefit
whatsoever from it uh other than having
memorized a lot of trivia about things
that people made up um I I tend to be
pretty cynical about the benefits of
fiction Mo most fiction is not written
to make you better in any way it's
written just to entertain you or exist
into fill up time but it sounds like
your own ideas have benefited a lot from
the Sci-Fi that you read yeah but it's
extremely little sci-fi in the grand
scheme of things right easily 99% of the
Sci-Fi I read was just completely
useless to me
um I I could have easily cut it down to
20 novels or short stories which
actually were good enough um and
insightful enough to actually change my
view I mean one volume for instance of
blindsight by Peter watts is worth all
hundred zanth novels or all you know 500
expanded universe novels of Star Wars
the ones you did find insightful the top
20 or so what did they have in common I
I would say that the characteristic they
have is that they all take non-human
intelligence seriously um it it doesn't
seem to you know it doesn't have to be
artificial intelligence necessarily uh
it's taking the idea of non-human
intelligence seriously and not imagining
your classic Sci-fi scenario of humans
kind of like going out into the Galaxy
with Ray Guns the sort of thing where
you have rockets and ray guns but you
don't have cell phones um people
complain that the singularity is is a
sort of like boring overused sci-fi
Trope but if if you went out and
actually grabbed random books of Science
Fiction that are out there you would
find that like less than 1% contain
anything remotely like that right or
have any kind of relevance to the
current context that we actually face
with AI do people tend to underrate or
overrate your intelligence I would say
they overestimate it um you know they
mistake for intelligence the fact that I
remember many things that I've written
many things over the years they imagine
that you know if they set me down that I
could do it all spontaneously at the
moment that they're they're meeting me
or talking to me but many things that um
I've thought about I I think I have the
of of having looked at before over a
long time so I'm cheating you know when
I talk to people I may just be quoting
something that I've already written or
at least thought a lot about so I I
think I come off as a lot smarter when
you're reading me than I actually am I
would say I'm not really all that smart
compared to many people I've known who
update very fast on the fly but but in
the end it's you know it's the output
that matters right so yeah I I guess
there is an on the-fly kind of
intelligence but there's another kind of
intelligence which is this ability to
synthesize things over a long period of
time then come up with grand theories as
a result of all these different things
that you're seeing and I don't think
that's just crystallized intelligence
right yeah it's not just crystallized
intelligence but I think that if you
could see all the individual steps in my
process you'd be a lot less impressed if
you could see all the times where I kind
of just note down something like hm like
that's funny or you know huh like
another example of that pattern and if
you just saw each particular step I I
think you would say that the steps in
isolation were very reasonable it's only
one that happens over a decade and you
don't see the individual stuff that my
output at the end looks like magic one
of my favorite quotes about this process
is from The Magicians pen and Teller
teller says magic is putting in more
effort than any reasonable person would
expect you to he tells the story about
how they make cockroaches appear from a
top hat where the trick is that they
researched and found special cockroaches
and then found special styrofoam to trap
the Cockroaches and arranged all of that
worked out all of those details just for
this one single trick that they do and
in the you know in the audience kind of
you think no reasonable person would do
that put in all of that effort to just
you know get the payoff of this trick
but they do it and the result is
cockroaches somehow appearing from an
empty hat that that's one of the
interesting things about your process
cuz there's a couple of writers like
Matt LaVine or burn Hobart who write an
article every day and I think of them
almost like autoregressive models um and
then on you there's uh I on some of the
block post you can see the start date
and the end date that you list on your
website of when you've been working on a
piece and sometimes it's like 2009 to
2024 and I feel like that just much more
like diffusion and you're just like keep
iterating on the same image again and
again one of my favorite blog post of
yours is your blog post uh evolution is
a back stop to RL where you talk about
Evolution as basically a mechanism to
learn a better learning process and that
explains why corporations don't improve
over time but biological organisms do um
I'm curious if you can walk me through
the years that it took to write that
what what was that process like step by
step yeah so the back stop essay that
you're referring to um is the synthesis
of seeing the same pattern show up again
and again a kind of stupid inefficient
way of learning um which you use to
learn something smarter but where you
still can't get rid of the original one
entirely right so sometimes examples
would just kind of connect to each other
um when I was thinking about this other
times you know once I started watching
for this pattern I would say oh yeah you
know pain is a good example of this
maybe this explains why humans have pain
in the very specific way that we have it
um when you can logically imagine other
kinds of pain and those other pains
would be smarter but nothing keeps them
honest so you just kind of chain them
one by one the these individual examples
of the pattern you're watching for um
and kind of keep clarifying the central
idea as you go right um Vick canstein
says that you can look at an idea from
many directions and then go in spirals
around it and in an essay like back stop
it was me kind of spiraling around this
idea of having many layers of learning
all the way down um and then so once you
notice one example of this pattern do
you just like you notice this pain
example do you just keep adding examples
to that I mean just walk me through the
process over time yeah so for that
specific essay the first versions were
about corporations not evolving um and
then as I read more and more of the kind
of meta reinforcement learning
literature from deepmind especially um I
added in material about neural
networks um and then I kind of kept
reading and thinking about the
philosophy of mind papers that I had
read and I eventually nailed down the
idea that pain you know might be another
instance of this um because pain like
makes us learn right but we can't get
rid of it because we need it to keep us
honest um and anyway at that point you
have more or less the structure of the
current essay and then are there
examples of blog posts where it's not a
matter of accumulating different
instances of what you later realize is
one bigger pattern but rather you just
got to have the full thesis at once um
for for those essays where there's a a
kind of like individual Eureka moment
there usually is still a bunch of
disperate things that I've been making
notes on that I don't even realize are
connected they just bother me for a long
time um and kind of like sit there
bothering me and I keep looking for
explanations for each individual one and
just not finding them it keeps bothering
me keeps bothering me and then one day I
I hit kind of that that sudden moment
that makes me go bam Eureka right the
these all are connected I I just have to
kind of like sit down and write this
single gigantic essay that pours out um
about it and then it's done that
particular essay um you know will just
be done at that point like right in one
go I might add in links like later on or
references but it won't fundamentally
change from that point uh what's an
example of an essay that had this kind
of process yeah someone asked about I
came up with one yesterday as a matter
of fact it it's one of my oldest essays
um the The Melancholy of subculture
Society um for that one I I'd been
reading about these miscellaneous things
like David Foster Wallace on tennis
people on internet media like video
games um and then one day it just kind
of hit me um this feeling or you know
observation that it's incredibly sad
that we have all these subcultures and
tribes online and that they can find
Community together um but they're still
incredibly isolated from the larger
society and then you know one day a
flash kind of just hit me about how
beautiful uh and yet also sad this is
and I just sat down and I I wrote down
the entire thing more or less um I
haven't really changed it since that
much at all uh I've added more links and
quotes and examples over time but but
nothing important the essence was just
kind of this like flash and I wrote it
down while it was there one of the
interesting quotes you have in that
essay is from David Foster wall when
he's talking about the tennis player
Michael Joyce and he's talking about the
sacrifices that Michael Joyce has had to
make in order to be top 10 in the world
at tennis which include things like
being basically functionally literate
because he's been playing tennis every
single day since he was you know seven
or something and not really having any
life outside of tennis what are the
Michael Joyce type sacrifices that you
have had to make to be g a that's a
hard-hitting question D um how have I
amputated my life in order to write um I
think I've amputated my life in many
respects professionally and personally
especially in terms of travel there are
many people I envy um for their ability
to kind of travel and socialize or for
their power and their positions in
places like anthropic where they're
insiders um I've sacrificed whatever
career I could have had or whatever fun
lifestyle um a digital Nomad lifestyle
and going Outdoors being a Buddhist monk
or maybe a a fancy traitor um all those
have to be sacrificed really for the for
the patient work of sitting down every
day and reading papers until my eyes
bleed and hoping that something good
comes out of it someday I mean why does
it feel like there's a trade-off between
the two because there are obviously
writers who travel a lot for example
Tyler Cowan or writers who have a lot of
influence like Jack Clark anthropic
right so what does it feel like you
can't do both at the same time I I can't
beat or be compared to Tyler Cowen here
Tyler Cowen is a oneman industry so is
GW yeah but but he he can't be
replicated so I just can't be Tyler
Cowen um you know Jack Clark he's also
his own thing he's able to write the
stories and his issues very well while
also being a policy person I respect
those people you know I I admire them um
but none of them I think quite hit my
particular interest in Niche at
following weird topics for a long period
of time and then collating kind of
sorting through the information for me
that just requires a large commitment to
reading vast masses of things in hopes
that some tiny detail perhaps will turn
out one day to be important so so walk
me through this process you mentioned
you um you read papers until your eyes
bleed out at the end of the day uh let's
just start you wake up in the morning
and you get straight to the papers like
what does your day look like uh so I
mean the workflow right now is more like
I wake up um I do normal morning things
and then I clean up the previous day
work on the website I'll I'll deal with
kind of various issues like formatting
or spelling errors um and I I kind of
you know review it and and think if I
I've properly collated everything and
put it in the right places from the
previous day sometimes I might have like
an extra thought that I need to go in
and add um or make a comment that I
realize was important after that I I
often you know shamelessly just go to
Twitter um or my RSS feed and just read
a large amount um until you know maybe I
get distracted by some comment or
question from someone um and then do
some writing on that um somewhere you
know usually in the evening I I often
just get exhausted and try to go and do
a real project or make a real
contribution to something um I'll
actually sit down and work on whatever
I'm supposed to have you know been
working on that day uh and then and then
I go to the gym um by that point I'm
pretty burned out from everything um yes
you know I I like going to the gym not
because of any kind of meat head or
athlete or even really enjoy
weightlifting um but just because I
think it it's it's the thing I can do
that's the most opposite from sitting in
front of my computer reading yeah this
is your theory of burnout right that you
just got to do the opposite of yeah um
you know that the problem I think when
people experience burnout is that you
just feel kind of a lack of reward for
what you're doing or what you're working
on you just need to do something
completely different something as
different as possible um maybe you could
do better than weightlifting but for me
you know it does feel very different
from anything that I do in front of a
computer I want to go back to your
process so every day you're loading up
all this context you're reading all the
RSS feeds and all these papers and are
you basically making contributions to
all your essays adding a little bit here
and there every single day or are you
building up some potential which will
manifest itself later on as a full essay
a fully formed thesis I would say it's
more the latter one um I think all the
minor low-level editions and pruning and
fixing I do is really not that important
um it's more just a way to make nicer
essays um it's a it's a purely kind of
aesthetic goal to make it as nice an
essay as I possibly can um and I'm
really waiting to see kind of what
happens next what would be the next
thing that that I'll um you know be
provoked by to to end up writing about
it's passing the time in between sudden
eruptions for many writers you you sort
of like can't neglect this kind of
gardening process right um You Don't
Harvest every day you have to tend the
garden for a long time in between
harvests uh if you start to neglect the
gardening because you're gallivanting
around the world let's say you're going
to book signing Events maybe you're
doing all the publicity stuff then
you're not really like doing the work of
of being in there tending the garden um
and that's undermining your future
Harvest um even if you can't see it
right now if you ask kind of what is
Tyler cowen's secret to being Tyler toen
my guess would be that he's just really
good at tending his garden um even as he
travels a crazy amount that would be his
secret that he's able to read books on a
plane um you know I can't read books on
a plane he he's able to write everything
in the airport I can do a little bit of
writing in the airport but not very much
um and he's also just very robust to the
wear and tear of traveling I'll be like
collapsing in the hotel room after
talking to people for eight hours he's
able to talk to people for 8 hours and
then go do podcasts and talk to someone
for another 4 hours or whatever um it's
extreme extremely admirable but I just
can't do that how often do you get bored
because it sounds like you're spending
all your day reading different things um
are they all just inherently interesting
to you or do you just TCH through it uh
even when it's not in the moment
compelling to you I don't think I get
bored too easily because I I switch
between so many different topics um even
if I'm kind of sick of deep learning
papers well you know then I have tons of
other things I can read or argue with
people about so I don't really get bored
I just end up getting kind of exhausted
um you know I I have to kind of go off
and do something else like lift weights
mhm what what is your most unusual but
successful work habit yeah I think I get
a lot more mileage out of arguing with
people online than like pretty much any
other uh writer does I I you know I'm
trying to give a genuine answer here uh
not not some stupid thing about no
taking I get a lot more out of arguing
with people than I think most people do
um you need motivation to right and
actually sit down and kind of
crystallize something and do the Harvest
work and after you tend your garden you
you do have to do the the harvest um and
the Harvest can be hard work it's very
tedious and you know there are many
people that I talk to who have many
great ideas but they don't want to
harvest because it's tedious and boring
and it's very hot out there in the
fields uh reaping and you're getting
Dusty and sweaty why why would you just
be inside having lemonade and I think
the motivation from arguing and being
angry at people online is in plentiful
Supply so I get a lot of mileage out of
people being wrong on the internet what
are the pitfalls of an isolated working
process I think aside from the obvious
one that you could kind of um you know
be like arbitrarily wrong um when
ranging by yourself and just become this
like crazy Looney um but by having a a
big confident wrong take um I think
aside from that you also have the issue
of kind of the emotional toll of of not
having colleagues that you can kind of
convince um you often just have this
experience of kind of like shouting onto
the internet um and and and where
everyone on the internet kind of
continues to be wrong one thing I
observe is that very often independent
writers are overcome by resentment and
anger and disappointment they sort of
like Spiral into bitterness and crankum
from there and that's kind of what kills
them
uh you know they they could have
continued if they'd only been able to
let go of the ideas and arguments and
kind of like move on to the next topic
spite can be a great motivation to write
um but you have to use it skillfully and
then kind of like Let It Go afterwards
um you you can only have it like while
you need the motivation to write and
then if you keep going you sort of hold
on to it you're sort of poisoning
yourself I'm sure You' have uh seen all
the comments from people who say that if
G spent the time that he spends
fine-tuning the CSS on his website
towards more projects more writing um
that the benefits of society could be
measured in the nearest million dollars
what's your reaction to people who say
you're spending too much time on side
design I have no defense at all there in
terms of objective benefits to society
um you know I do it because I'm selfish
and I like it that's my defense I like
the Aesthetics of my website and it it's
a hobby does the design help you think
it does because I like rereading my
stuff more when I can appreciate the
Aesthetics of it and the beauty of the
website it's easier for me to tolerate
reading something for the hundredth time
when I would otherwise be sick to death
of it site maintenance is inherently
right for for the the author this kind
of inherent spaced repetition if I go
over pages to check that some new
formatting feature worked I'm getting
spaced repetition there more than once
I've gone back to check some stupid CSS
issue and look at something and thought
oh I should change something or oh that
means something so so in a way it's not
I I think as much of a waste as it looks
but I can't defend it entirely if
someone wants to make their own website
they should not invest as much um for
the aesthetic value I just want a really
nice website there's so many bad
websites out there and it depresses me
there's at least one website I love by
the way I'm going to mention this since
you never mentioned it yourself but I
think the main way you fund your
research is through your patreon right
and uh yeah you never advertise it but I
don't know I feel like the thing kind of
thing you're doing if um if it was
financially viable and if it uh got
adequate funding Not only would you be
able to keep doing it but other people
who want to be independent researchers
could see it's a thing you can do it's a
viable thing you can do and more GS
would exist yeah well I don't
necessarily want more gws to exist uh I
I just want more writers and more
activeness and more agency in general I
would be perfectly happy if someone
simply wrote more Reddit comments and
never took a dollar for their writings
and just wrote better Reddit comments um
I'd be perfectly happy if if someone had
a Blog and they they kept writing but
they just put a little more thought into
the design I I'd be H kind of perfectly
happy if no one ever wrote something but
they hosted PDFs so that links don't rod
in general I think you don't have to be
a writer delivering long form essays
that's just one of many ways to write it
happened to be the one that I personally
kind of prefer but it'd be totally valid
to be a Twitter thread writer how do you
sustain yourself while writing full-time
patreon and savings um I I have a
patreon which does around 900 to a th000
each month um and then I cover the rest
with my savings I got lucky with having
some early Bitcoins um and made enough
to write for a long time uh but not
forever so I try to spend as little as
possible to make it last um it I should
probably advertise the patreon more but
I'm too proud to shill it harder um it's
also awkward trying to come up with some
good rewards which don't entail a pay
wall uh p patreon and substack work well
for a lot of people like Scott Alexander
because they like writing regular
newsletter style updates but I don't
like to I just let it run and hope it
works wait so if you're doing 900 to
1,000 a month and you're sustaining
yourself on that that must mean you're
sustaining yourself on less than
$112,000 a year what's your lifestyle
like at 12K yeah I mean listen I live in
in the middle of nowhere you know I
don't travel much or eat out um or have
health insurance or or anything like
that um I I cook my own food I use a
free gym uh there was this time where
the the floor of my bedroom you know
started collapsing um it was so old that
the humidity had like decayed the wood
um and we we just got a bunch of crap
wood and AD joisted and propped it up uh
you know so if it lets in some bugs oh
well um I I I live like a grad student
um but with better Ramen basically uh
and and I don't mind it much since I I
think I you know I basically spend all
my time reading anyway it's still
surprising to me that you can take care
of Ren take care of your cats uh deal
with any emergencies all of that on 12K
a year yeah I mean I'm lucky enough to
be an excellent health and to have have
had no real emergencies to date um this
can't last forever obviously um and and
so it won't I'm definitely not trying to
claim that this is like an ideal
lifestyle or that anyone else could or
should try to like replicate my exact
approach I got lucky with Bitcoin in
particular um and with being satisfied
living like a monk and with with the
health that I've had um anyone who would
like to take up a career as a writer or
blogger should understand that this is
not an example that they specifically
can imitate right I don't think I'm not
trying to be a role model um every
writer will have to figure it out a
different way maybe it can be something
like a substack um or just writing on
the side while while slinging JavaScript
for a tech company uh I I don't know it
seems like you've enjoyed this recent
trip to San Francisco um what would it
take to get you to move here yeah I
think at this point it mostly is just
money that's stopping me um I probably
should bite the bull and just move
anyway uh but but but I'm a miser at
heart uh and I hate thinking of how many
months of writing Runway I'd have to
give up for each month in San Francisco
if someone wanted to give me I don't
know 50k to 100K a year to move to SF
and continue writing full-time like I do
now i' take get in a heartbeat um until
then I'm still trying to psych myself up
into a move I know that that sounds
doable I mean and if if somebody did
want to get in touch with you about
contributing how would they do that they
could just email me at
g.net all right so after thee episode I
convinced G to set up a stripe checkout
link where people can donate if they
wish to so if you want to support his
work please go to the link in the
description look the way that GW is
obsessed with his rabbit holes stripe is
obsessed with payments on your behalf
the difference between making and
missing a sale often comes down to how a
customer wants to pay in Switzerland
they want to pay with twin in
Netherlands maybe with ideal these are
systems you might never have heard of of
but they're super popular in those
countries stripe optimizes their
checkout experience so that customers
get served whatever payment experience
is most likely to work for them and if
it works for them that means you know
more buyers for you more revenue for you
stripe is how I run my business it's how
I in fact made my business in the first
place I set up my company using stripe
Atlas and now I invoice all my
advertisers using stripe invoicing and
look I told Gwen to set up his donation
link using stripe
because strip has been genuinely
delightful to work with and that's why I
recommended it stripe to him that's why
I recommend stripe to you go to
stripe.com to learn more all right back
to G by when will AI models be more
diverse and more different from each
other than the human population I'm
going to say that if you exclude
capability from that AI models are
already much more diverse cognitively
than humans are um I think different
llms think in very distinct ways that
you can tell right away from a sample of
them right so an llm operates nothing
like a gan um a a gan also is is totally
different from vaes they have totally
different latent spaces especially in
the lower end where they're small or bad
models they have wildly different
artifacts and errors in a way that we
just wouldn't see with humans um I think
humans are really very quite similar in
writing and attitude compared to these
absurd outputs of different kinds of
models really I mean if you look at bbot
Arena where you can do these side by
side comparisons of the outputs of
different models it's often very hard to
tell which one comes from which model
yeah yeah but I mean this is all very
heavily tuned right so now you're
restricting it to relatively recent llms
um with everyone riding on each other's
coattails and often training on the
exact same data so I think this is a
situation um like much closer to if they
were identical twins if I'm you know I'm
not restricting myself to just LMS and
and I compare the wide diversity of say
like image generation models that we've
had they often have totally different
ways right some of them seem as similar
to each other as ants due to Beavers I
think with in llms I would agree that
there has been a massive loss of
diversity um th things used to be way
more diverse W within like in among
llms but but across deep learning in
general I think we've seen a whole range
of minds and ways to think that you
wouldn't find in any philosophy of Mind
paper what's an example of two different
models that have these kinds of
cognitive
yeah I'll I'll give one example I was
telling someone the other day um so you
know Gan models have incentives to hide
things because it's an adversarial loss
um whereas diffusion models have no no
such thing right so so Gan models are
scared um they they put hands off the
screen um and they they just kind of
can't think about hands whereas
diffusion models think about hands but
in they're like gigantic monstrous
cthulu ESC abortions people weren't
paying enough attention to scaling in
2020 is there some Trend today where
people aren't really comprehending the
full implications of where this is
headed I'm excited by the weight loss
drugs the glp drugs um their effects in
General on health and addiction across
all sorts of behaviors really surprised
me um no one predicted that as far as I
know and while the results are still
very preliminary um it it does seem like
it's real uh so I think that's going to
tell us something important about human
willpower and dysfunctionality do these
glp drugs break the algon argument um
from your blog post that if there are
any simple useful interventions without
bad side effects then Evolution should
have already found them I think it's too
soon to say because we haven't actually
figured out what's going on with the
glps to even understand what they're
doing at all um you know like what has
the the off Target it's kind of crazy
that activating and deactivating both
work um it it's a completely crazy
situation um I I don't really know what
to think about the alron argument there
it could be that the benefits actually
decrease Fitness in the fertility sense
because you're going out and having a
happy life instead of having kids um so
no offense to parents um or it could
just be that it's hitting the body in a
way that's really really hard to
replicate and any kind of genetic way um
or I don't know it could just it's too
soon when I think back I see that the
Obesity crisis only became obvious
around the
1990s um you know it's it's quite recent
and I look back at photos and today is
completely unrecognizable from 1990 you
look at photos and people are still thin
right um you look at photos now and
everyone is like a blimp so you just you
can't possibly have any kind of alron
argument over like 20 to 30 years M when
you look back at the RO and you see how
the lead was constantly poisoning the
entire city what Credence do you give to
the possibility that something in our
environment is
having the kind a magnitude of effect on
us that lead was having on the ancient
Romans yeah I think the odds of there
being something as bad as lead is almost
100% um we've so many things out there
right chemists are always cooking up new
stuff there are all sorts of things with
microbiomes plastics are trendy but
maybe it's not Plastics um maybe it's
something else entirely you know but
there there's almost no way that
everything that we have put out there is
totally benign and safe and has no
harmful effects at any concentration uh
it it just seems like a really strong
claim to be making I I don't believe in
any particular one but I do believe in
like 1% here 1% here 1% here um there's
something out there um there's something
out there where we're just like going to
look back at it and say wow like th
those people were really poisoning
themselves just like with leted gasoline
If Only They had known you know X Y and
Z or whatever um it's so obvious now and
do you think this would manifest itself
most likely in cognitive impairments or
in obesity or or in something else yeah
I think a priori I would expect uh
possibly intelligence to be like the
single most fragile thing and most
harmed by it but when we when we look at
the time series there intelligence is
pretty stable overall um so so I would
have to say that whatever the harmful
thing is it's probably not going to be
on intelligence whereas obesity is a
much better candidate because you do see
obesity go crazy right over the last 30
years I was um I was surprised yesterday
to hear you say that you are skeptical
of Bay Area type um experimentation with
psychedelics and because you know I sort
of associate you with very much this
word of you got to experiment with
different substances and see if they are
helpful to you and so I'm curious why
you draw Chester's friends here when it
comes to psychedelics yeah I think the
cleanest way to divide that would just
be to point out that the effects of
psychedelics can be acute and permanent
um the things I was looking at are much
more controlled in in the sense that
they you know are relatively manageable
in effect um none of them affect your
judgment permanently about whether to
take more neotropics
whereas I think something like LSD
permanently changes how you see things
such as taking LSD or permanently
changes your kind of psychiatric State
there there's a cumulative effect with
psychedelics That You Don't See Much
with neurot Tropics um which makes
neotropics inherently a heck of a lot
safer and much more easy to quantify the
effects of um with neotropics you don't
see people kind of like spinning off
into the crazy outcome psychedelics have
uh you know they they get crazier and
crazier each time they take another dose
which makes crazy enough to want to take
another dose psychedelics have what you
might call a kind of self- reccommending
problem uh where they always make you
want to take more of them I think it's
kind of similar to
meditation uh what what is the most
visible sign of having done a lot of
meditation right is that you seem
compelled to tell people that they ought
to meditate um this kind of spiral leads
to bad outcomes for psychedelics that
you just don't see with
neotropics the standard failure case for
neotropics is that you spend like a few
hundred or thousand dollars and then you
got no real benefit out of it uh you
went on with your life you you know that
kind of thing you did some weird drugs
maybe for a while and that was all it's
not so bad it's a weird way to get your
entertainment but in principle it's not
really all that worse than going to the
movie theater um for a while and
spending $1,000 do on movie theater
tickets with psychedelics you're
changing yourself permanently
irrevocably in a way you don't really
understand and exposing yourself to all
sorts of malicious outside influences
whatever happens to occur to you while
you're there and you know very
impressionable um and you know obviously
like a few uses can be good um I've
Gotten Good out of my few uses um but if
you're doing it more than that you
should really have a hard look in the
mirror about what benefit you think
you're getting and how you're changing
have you put any thought into what is
people don't know your voice people
don't know your face and as a result
they have this interesting parasocial
relationship with you and I wonder if
you have a theory of what kind of role
you fill in people's life basically are
are you asking what role I actually fill
or the role that I aspire to fill let's
do both okay um the role that I want to
fill is actually sort of how llm see me
oddly enough I think if you play around
with LMS like Claude um Claud you know
Claude 3 a character named GW sometimes
will show up and he plays the role of
kind of this like Mentor or old wizard
offering insight into the situation and
and exhorting them uh you know with a
with a call to Adventure you too can
write stuff and do stuff and think stuff
I would like people to go away having
not just been kind of entertained or
gotten some useful information but to be
better uh people in however slightest
sense to to have an aspiration that web
pages could be better that the internet
could be better you too could go out and
read stuff you to could have all your
thoughts and compile your thoughts into
essays too you could do all of this but
I fear that the way that it actually
works for quite a few people is that I
wind up either as kind of a a guru or
trickster devil um kind of figure
depending on whether you like me or or
hate me either I'm the god of statistics
and referencing uh who can do no wrong
just take everything on the site's
gospel which I really dislike or I'm
just some sort of horrible covert
malicious Neo-Nazi eugenicist
totalitarian communist anti-chinese
devil figure you know lurking in the
background trying to bring down Western
Society final question what are the open
rabbit holes you have the things you're
curious about but don't have an answer
to that you hope to have an answer to by
2050 I think by
2050 I really hope that we can finally
answer some of these like really big
questions about ourselves that have just
reliably resisted definitive answers um
I think a lot of them might not matter
anymore but I'd still like to know so
for example like why do we sleep or
dream um why do why do humans age why
does sexual reproduction exist why do
humans differ so much from each other um
and also
daytoday why do humans take so long to
develop technological
civilization where are all the aliens um
why didn't China have the Industrial
Revolution instead how should we have
predicted the Deep learning Revolution
and why are our brains so oversized
compared to artificial neural networks I
think those are some of the questions
that I really hope we've answered by
2050 all right gorin this has been
excellent thank you so much for coming
on the podcast thanks